# Open Government Data
Damian Oswald
September 10, 2023

- [<span class="toc-section-number">1</span> Some principles behind
  OGD](#some-principles-behind-ogd)
  - [<span class="toc-section-number">1.1</span> The FAIR
    principle](#the-fair-principle)
  - [<span class="toc-section-number">1.2</span> The five star
    system](#the-five-star-system)
  - [<span class="toc-section-number">1.3</span> Open
    standards](#open-standards)
  - [<span class="toc-section-number">1.4</span>
    Interoperability](#interoperability)
  - [<span class="toc-section-number">1.5</span> Data owner, custodian
    and steward](#data-owner-custodian-and-steward)
- [<span class="toc-section-number">2</span> The Swiss OGD
  ecosystem](#the-swiss-ogd-ecosystem)
  - [<span class="toc-section-number">2.1</span> Legal
    framework](#legal-framework)
- [References](#references)

“The world’s most valuable resource is no longer oil, but data” – at
least that’s how *The Economist* phrased it in an article in 2017 (*1*).
But is that really true? There are certainly good reasons to support
this metaphor. Much like oil, data can also be seen as a raw material –
and as a raw material they are worthless unless processed.

However, there is the argument that data could be viewed more like an
infrastructure than oil in the sense that it provides the fundamental
framework or system needed for things to function. This could be in the
context of operations, processes or even economies. Data, similar to
infrastructure, is essential for information flow, decision making, and
overall functioning in today’s digital era. And, unlike oil, which is
consumed and needs to be replenished, data can be used repeatedly.
Seeing data as a sort of infrastructure is used as an argument that its
publication should be a responsibility of the state — in the form of
open government data (*2*).

Open government data (OGD) refers to the idea that data collected and
generated by government entities should be freely accessible to the
public, excluding information that compromises privacy and security.
This type of data is often used as a means to promote transparency and
accountability in government, enable public participation, and drive
economic growth through the development of new apps, products, and
services. It also offers potential for innovation by providing raw
material for research, as well as the basis for planning in areas like
transport, healthcare or environmental policy.

# Some principles behind OGD

## The FAIR principle

OGD should be FAIR. The latter stands for **F**indability,
**A**ccessibility, **I**nteroperability, and **R**euse. *Findability*
means that data have a unique and persistent identification. For
example, personal data should be given identification numbers (ID) that
can be uniquely assigned to individuals. Furthermore, datasets should be
described with *metadata*. *Accessibility* refers to the principle that
data are freely available via a URL. If data is protected, then at least
their metadata should be published. *Interoperability* refers to the
publication of data and metadata in a known (and widespread) format.
Lastly, by *Reuse*, we mean that the provenance of data is indicated,
the data is always provided with data usage license and is retrievable
in a sensible size.

## The five star system

Not all OGD is of the same quality – *all OGD are open, but some are
more open than others*. In 2010, Sir Tim Berners-Lee suggested a 5-star
ranking for open data, starting with one star, where the data get more
stars as proprietary formats are removed and links are added
([table 1](#tbl-stars)).

<div id="tbl-stars">

|                       Stars | Idea                                                                                | Example format       |
|----------------------------:|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------|
|                     $\star$ | Make your stuff available on the web under an open license (no matter the format)   | `PDF`                |
|                $\star\star$ | Make it available as structured data (e.g., Excel instead of image scan of a table) | `XLS`                |
|           $\star\star\star$ | Make it available in a non-proprietary open format (e.g., CSV instead of Excel)     | `CSV`, `JSON`, `XML` |
|      $\star\star\star\star$ | Use URIs to denote things, so that people can point at your stuff                   | `RDF`                |
| $\star\star\star\star\star$ | Link your data to other data to provide context                                     | `LOD`                |

Table 1: The five star system according to Tim Berners-Lee. The more
stars, the more *open* the published data is.

</div>

## Open standards

For data to be truly open, it is not enough that it is accessible. The
data format also needs to follow an *open standard*, that is, a standard
that is widely used, internationally accepted, consense-based, in the
public domain and clearly defined. Importantly, metadata, i.e. data
about the data, should also follow that open standard. Example of that
are *Dublin Core*, *Schema.org*, or *DCAT*.

## Interoperability

Interoperability is the ability of independent, heterogeneous computer
systems to work together as seamlessly as possible in order to exchange
information in an efficient and usable manner, and to make it available
to the user without the need for special agreements between the systems.
For this, compliance with common standards is necessary.

## Data owner, custodian and steward

The roles of data owners, data custodians, and data stewards, all play
critical parts in the management and governance of data, but their
responsibilities are distinct:

1.  **Data Owner:** This is usually a member of management who has legal
    authority and control over some data. They are responsible for the
    security and quality of the data and for determining who should have
    access to the information. They must also ensure compliance with
    relevant legal and regulatory requirements.

2.  **Data Custodian:** The data custodian is typically responsible for
    the technical environment and operations needed to protect and
    maintain data. These responsibilities may include data storage,
    retrieval, archival, or purging. The data custodian ensures data is
    managed and protected, execute the access decisions made by the data
    owner, and maintain the data’s technical infrastructure.

3.  **Data Steward:** The data steward ensures the quality and usability
    of the data. They concern themselves with data standards, data
    definitions, data quality metrics, and business metadata. They serve
    as a bridge between data owners (who decide the policies) and data
    custodians (who implement the policies) by making sure that data is
    reliable, understood, and used correctly (*3*).

# The Swiss OGD ecosystem

## Legal framework

- Öffentlichkeitsgesetz und Öffentlichkeitsverordnung seit 1. Juli 2006
  in Kraft
  - Paradigmenwechsel: Vom Grundsatz der Geheimhaltung mit
    Öffentlichkeitsvorbehalt zum Grundsatz der Öffentlichkeit mit
    Geheimhaltungsvorbehalt
  - Vor 2006 Geheimhaltungsgrundsatz: Freies Ermessen der Behörden ob
    sie Zugang geben oder nicht
  - Seit 2006 Öffentlichkeitsprinzip: Durchsetzbares Recht auf Zugang zu
    amtlichen Dokumenten
- Parlamentarische Gruppe Digitale Nachhaltigkeit (Parldigi):
  - Gegründet 2009 zur Förderung von Open Source Software
  - Weitere Themen wie Open Government Data, Netzneutralität,
    Netzsperren, Überwachung etc. kamen über die Jahre dazu
  - Über 50 eingereichte Vorstösse, zahlreiche erfolgreiche Motionen und
    Postulate (öffentliche Beschaffung, OGD etc.)
  - <https://www.parldigi.ch>
  - Schwerpunkte sind: Open source software, open standards, open data,
    open access, open content, open internet, open government.
- Verein Opendata.ch
  - Vereinsgründung 2012
  - Setzt sich für open data in der Schweiz ein
- OGD Strategie Schweiz 2019 – 2023
  - (*2*)
  - Geschäftsstelle OGD im Bundesamt für Statistik (BFS) ist
    verantwortlich für Umsetzung
  - Koordinierte Datenpublikation fördern
  - Daten und Datenbeschreibung: Qualität sicherstellen
  - OGD wird durch durch standardisierte und aussagekräftige Metadaten
    beschrieben –\> informiert über Zustandekommen, Struktur und
    Vertrauenswürdigkeit der Daten
  - Betreiben der Plattform <https://opendata.swiss>
- Bundesgesetz über den Einsatz elektronischer Mittel zur Erfüllung von
  Behördenaufgaben (EMBAG) (*4*)

> **Art. 9** Open Source Software
>
> <sup>1</sup> Die diesem Gesetz unterstehenden Bundesbehörden legen den
> Quellcode von Software offen, die sie zur Erfüllung ihrer Aufgaben
> entwickeln oder entwickeln lassen, es sei denn die Rechte Dritter oder
> sicherheitsrelevante Gründe würden dies ausschliessen oder
> einschränken.

> **Art. 10** Open Government Data
>
> <sup>1</sup> Die diesem Gesetz unterstehenden Verwaltungseinheiten
> machen ihre Daten, die sie zur Erfüllung ihrer gesetzlichen Aufgaben
> beschaffen oder generieren und die elektronisch gespeichert und in
> Sammlungen strukturiert vorliegen, öffentlich zugänglich.

<!-- ## Anonymizing data -->
<!-- In 1998, Samarati and Sweeney have developed a protocol called $k$-anonymity in order to anonymize personal data [@samarati1998protecting]. -->
<!-- A simple algorithm to calculate the $k$-anonymity of a data frame in R could be written as follows: -->
<!-- ``` r -->
<!-- K <- numeric(nrow(D)) -->
<!-- for (i in 1:nrow(D)) { -->
<!--    for (j in 1:nrow(D)) { -->
<!--       if(i==j) next -->
<!--       if(all(D[i,qi]==D[j,qi])) K[j] <- K[j]+1 -->
<!--    } -->
<!-- } -->
<!-- k <- min(K) -->
<!-- ``` -->
<!-- Here, `K` is the number of identical entries found for an observation in the data set `D`, while `k` is the minimum of vector `K`. The vector `qi` contains variable names of the quasi-identifiers. -->
<!-- \begin{table} -->
<!--   \centering -->
<!--   \begin{tabular}{@{}llll@{}} -->
<!--     \toprule -->
<!--     Name & Birthday & Sex & Positive \\ -->
<!--     \midrule -->
<!--     Alison Thompson & 1992-04-21 & f & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     Thomas Peterson & 1992-03-04 & m & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     Daniel Smith & 1991-11-15 & m & \texttt{True} \\ -->
<!--     Ethan Hudson & 1991-09-29 & m & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     Emily Gibson & 1992-12-02 & f & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     Charlotte Ava Bradley & 1992-05-18 & f & \texttt{True} \\ -->
<!--     \bottomrule -->
<!--   \end{tabular} -->
<!--   \caption{Example data set of personal data.} -->
<!--   \label{table:k1} -->
<!-- \end{table} -->
<!-- \begin{table} -->
<!--   \centering -->
<!--   \begin{tabular}{@{}llll@{}} -->
<!--     \toprule -->
<!--     Year & Sex & Positive \\ -->
<!--     \midrule -->
<!--     1992 & f & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     1992 & m & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     1991 & m & \texttt{True} \\ -->
<!--     1991 & m & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     1992 & f & \texttt{False} \\ -->
<!--     1992 & f & \texttt{True} \\ -->
<!--     \bottomrule -->
<!--   \end{tabular} -->
<!--   \caption{Example data set of personal data.} -->
<!--   \label{table:k1} -->
<!-- \end{table} -->

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-economist2017" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">1.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">The Economist, The world’s most
valuable resource is no longer oil, but data (2017).</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-fedlex2018" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">2.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft,
<span class="nocase">Strategie f<span class="nocase">ü</span>r offene
Verwaltungsdaten in der Schweiz 2019-2023
(Open-Government-Data-Strategie, OGD-Strategie)</span> (2018),
(available at <https://fedlex.data.admin.ch/eli/fga/2019/125>).</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-plotkin2020data" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">3.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">D. Plotkin, *[Data stewardship: An
actionable guide to effective data management and data
governance](https://doi.org/10.1016/C2012-0-07057-3)* (Academic press,
2020).</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-fedlex2023" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">4.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft,
<span class="nocase">Bundesgesetz <span class="nocase">ü</span>ber den
Einsatz elektronischer Mittel zur Erf<span class="nocase">ü</span>llung
von Beh<span class="nocase">ö</span>rdenaufgaben (EMBAG)</span> (2023),
(available at <https://fedlex.data.admin.ch/eli/fga/2023/787>).</span>

</div>

</div>
